in a normal tone. Where are you going to place that?
Let's put it right here.
That way I can watch it. Well, some say you have a low
voice and that you're God's gift to the radio
kingdom, but I don't know if it's going to sound
that way when we play this tape back. So what do you
think about that? Well, all we care about is that we
can be heard, right? So if you can type this away, we
won't have any screw-ups.
We set? Let's see, we're recording on 20 March
1986, sitting in the living room up on Summit
Avenue, and Chuck is about to ask me some
penetrating questions. That's right. So why
don't you first tell us a little bit about
yourself? That was Chuck. Hi, squeaky voice.
I'm God's gift to women. That's for certain, boys.
What would you like to know? The background? A
quick biographical background, and then your
time in Nam, what you spent and what you did. OK.
Well, I was born on January 8, 1946, on a log cabin in
southern Minnesota. And I was drafted on October
3, 1968. I
went on down to basic training at Fort Campbell,
Kentucky. And about the first week in December, we
flew over. We graduated. Our basic training
company graduated. And we flew on over to Fort
Lewis, Washington. and did AIT, which is advanced
infantry training, in the snow at Fort Lewis in
preparation of going to the jungles of Vietnam.
That concluded the end of February. I then had a
short leave and went to the non-commissioned
officer's candidate school at the infantry
school at Fort Benning, Georgia. Graduated from
there at the end of June Then drove back to Fort
Lewis, Washington where I was platoon sergeant
for a platoon of AIT infantry cadets. And then I had
a three week leave and arrived in Nam at the end of
sometime in September, early September. And I was
assigned to the 25th Infantry Division. Spent a
couple of days at Koo Chee in processing.
Infantry Division. And we were called the
Wolfhounds. And our area of operation was
adjacent to the Cambodian border, northwest of
Saigon.
So, going into NAMM, why, what was your purpose?
Why did you think you were going? What was your job
to be accomplished? My feeling was that my father
was a World War I Marine and a World War II Army
officer, and an extremely patriotic and fair sort
of person. And the prevailing political belief in
our community, in our farming community, was that
The military leaders and the political leaders
were sending us over there because of the Red
Menace and that it was necessary to combat
communism, monolithic communism, over there
before it got to our shores. And now when did you
leave Vietnam? Left Vietnam on July 10th, 1970.
And how were you greeted at home upon your arrival?
Not very warmly. I was called a baby killer shortly
after getting into California. And people didn't
seem to care.
Other vets would talk to you. And it was a big
camaraderie. And it was like we were an exclusive
union of people who the rest of society didn't
quite know what to think of us. Well, what was your
feeling to the war that was going on then while you
were in the States then? Yeah, as I came back. Yeah,
from when you first arrived, how did your attitude
change, if indeed it had? Within about three weeks
of getting into country, two to three weeks, my
attitude began to change. I thought that we were
saving these people, we were, you know, over
there, liberators, helping them, that they were
welcoming us with open arms. When I got out into the
countryside and we got into areas that supposedly
no American troops had ever been in before, the
people there were afraid of us, which might be
quite natural, because for years they had the
French terrorizing them, and then they had the VC
terrorizing them and taking their rice, and now
they had us, and if they were too friendly toward
us, the VC would note that and come back that night
and do something, harm them. So my attitude
changed from one of, well, this is a good idea, and
I'm sure everything's progressing well, and
we've got the best minds and the best and the
brightest thinking about this and doing it, to one
of the South Vietnamese troops were not pulling an
equal share. The South Vietnamese civilians were
afraid of us. They didn't seem to know how. They may
not have been so afraid of us, but they didn't know
how to handle us. And they were caught between the
VC and us. But the feeling that they gave us was not
one of overwhelming welcome, in my opinion. So
then these feelings, are they the reasons, or you
ended up joining the Veterans Against the War?
What made you do that? Well, going back to that
about three weeks to a month, After being in
country, as my attitude began to change after
being there two weeks, two more weeks down the
road, I'm only in country a month, we're getting
casualties. We're in a heavy booby-trapped area.
They snipe at us. We rarely at this point engage a
large group of enemy. It's snipers and booby
traps. And almost daily, every other day,
somebody was injured by a booby trap. And just the
responses that we had, you know, we were limited in
our responses. They were across the border. We
couldn't do anything about it. It was, you know, we
operated on body counts and the...
Well, specifically though, I mean, you get home
and your attitudes change, but... What was it
that, why did you, your reasons for joining the
VBAW?
Well, it was a good night last night. A month after
being there, I came to realize that the people
above me in the chain of command didn't really want
to hear what I thought about what was going on. They
didn't want to hear what my men thought. I started
out as a squad leader. A month later, I was a platoon
sergeant.
They didn't want to hear. The war had been
diagnosed. It had been decided by computers and
statistical data, primarily by McNamara,
Secretary of Defense McNamara, that the war was
being won and it was progressing in a certain way
and it should be done this way. And the military
leaders above us apparently did not want to have
data and figures presented to them and ideas which
disproved that or were contrary to that. And so
instead of coming out with a grassroots level,
having an open-door policy, the general never
came out and said, hey, what do you guys think about
how we ought to do things? It was always, well, this
is the way we're doing it, and there's a grand
strategy, and we really don't care that you think
otherwise. So then you thought the veterans
against the war was a means of expressing what
wasn't being expressed at NAM. Absolutely. And
also, the VFW and American Legion had indicated
that they very clearly supported the American
effort, a political position they had to take. But
they also indicated that the veterans of Vietnam
supported the effort. And that was not true in my
area, and it was not true with a lot of veterans. And
we were on the cutting edge of, we were the first
veterans to say, we don't believe in the war, the
war isn't being run right. What the press tells us,
what the military tells the press to tell the
people here, there's a lot of factual inaccuracy,
and we want to set the record straight. And we think
we're over there dying and we're not going to win
the war. I arrived in country in September of 1969.
My feeling by October, sometime in October, was
that we were not going to win the war because the
South Vietnamese were not going to support us
strongly enough once we were removed.
It just seemed apparent at that point to me and to
the people in my unit that that was going to happen.
I don't think anyone really thought that the South
Vietnamese were going to keep the North
Vietnamese out once we left. So when was it then
that you joined the Veterans Against the War?
About six months after I got back and tried to get
into some normalcy again. I was at school and I
noticed the signs around campus saying, Vietnam
Veterans Against the War Meeting Room, such and
such. And I didn't know whether I wanted to get into
it with these people or not, and I didn't know what
they stood for. And so I kind of walked by the room a
number of times and paused and listened to the
conversations going on and smoked a cigarette
outside the door, trying to decide whether I
wanted to talk to these people or whether they
represented something other than I did. And so I
joined them, ended up joining them about nine
months after I got back. I probably joined them in
the winter of January, February of 1971. Now this
was on, what campus was this? The beautiful campus
of Mankato State College, where tuition is low and
girls are easy. So when you joined, did you find
that they reflected the same things that you were
thinking then? Everyone had their own slightly
unique perspective, but there was a common thread
which bound the veterans there in that group that
And the thread was that the government, our
government, was lying to the military. The
military was lying to the government, and they
were both lying to the people here about what was
going on. Because we were always winning the war.
There were major new breakthroughs, new
developments. We were continually turning the
corner on the war over there. But yet we were over
there. We saw the headlines in the American papers
that our relatives would send to us while we were in
Vietnam, which would say that we were turning the
corner. But yet we felt very clearly that was not
the case, that this was all media hyperbole.
That's hyperbole.
What then was the size of the organization that you
joined, would you say? When I joined, there were
probably about 25 members on a roll that would
usually get together once a week. We would have
between 20 and 25 people showing up once a week. And
then we began to socialize outside of those
meetings, run into each other in the union, have
more discussions. Did you eventually work your
way up into some sort of... official position, or
were you just one of the members? Yeah, I did.
After, from that 25-member start, we decided that
it wasn't enough to just gather in a room and talk
about this. We contacted a printing company, and
we had some mailers developed. We were able to get
the school to release the name of all the veterans
on campus. So we mailed to every veteran on campus.
and asked them if they were interested in joining,
and asked them what their political views were,
and encouraged them to come on down to one of our
meetings, regardless of their political views,
because we wanted this to be a group of veterans,
rather than a select group who had a specific idea.
We wanted it to be as encompassing as we possibly
could. And eventually I became regional
coordinator for Minnesota, Iowa, and the North
Dakotas and Montana, five-state region. Now,
that seems like a fairly quick, when you say you
eventually became the coordinator now, was that a
fairly short period of time or? I mean, it was
probably over a four-month period, three to
four-month period. How do you account for rising
so high, let's say, so quickly? Because I was very
much less burnt out at that point than other vets
were. I was probably, I had a better media image. I
was more articulate and less, definitely less
radical. And in meetings, I strongly believe in
the democratic process and the marketplace of
ideas. And I want to hear what everybody thinks.
And that's kind of why. People just said, well, he
doesn't have the long hair. He represents a good
image. He states our position well. Let's make him
deal with the public. Because we don't want a long
hair who looks like a radical hippie trying to get
these points across because we'll only... hurt
the points we're trying to make. You mentioned
radical. Did you have some radicals within? And if
so, what do you mean by radical? Well, yeah, we had
people whose ideas about any number of things were
more radical than mine. You know, radical being
noticeably different than what most people
perceived the mainstream idea to be at that time.
We had some who claimed that they didn't care what
happened to the American POWs in Vietnam. You
know, a stance that we didn't agree with, but there
was one person in particular who always used to
argue that the American pilots in the Air Force who
flew the bombing missions who got shot down and
were in captivity deserved it because they were
indiscriminately bombing. And that's not a
position the rest of us identified with or agreed
to. Well, as regional coordinator then, what were
your tactics in trying to have the truth be known?
We contacted, we started out in the Mankato area
and the Minneapolis-St. Paul area, in the Mankato
area. We contacted the Kiwanis Club, the Lions
Clubs, the various schools in the area, the
political parties, and we had a group, a team of
four of us, who would go out and address, say, the
Hilltop Kiwanis Noon Luncheon Meetings and
present our views and try to engage in a discussion
with the folks there. And we wanted to tell them,
We're veterans. We're patriotic veterans. The
government's saying that we're winning the war.
We are not winning the war. At some point, we're
going to pull out. We think it's foolish to
continue to commit troops on the level that we're
doing it now. Either we go in and win the war, or we
ought to get out. Because once we leave, we
believed that there was going to be a bloodbath and
that
we were eventually going to lose. So we did that in
the Mankato area. In the St. Paul, Minneapolis
area, we conducted the same things on the
university campus. On all of the campuses in the
area, we would come on and set up booths, talk to
people, try and conduct rallies, send speakers.
And we would occasionally get together. We'd call
a press conference to announce this or that in
relation to our activities. Did any of these
rallies meet with any resistance? Or were they
always, and by resistance I'm implying today,
rallies get out of hand like they did in some points
in the nation? No, we were extremely careful. We
knew that this was happening and was creating bad
press in other areas. We didn't want rallies to get
out of hand. We didn't want a bunch of emotional
people running around screaming slogans. People
to sit down and think about what we were saying and
be rational and logical and view it from that
perspective. And we were extremely careful to
keep things from getting out of hand. There are
always a couple of people who believe, proclaim to
believe so strongly in this or that or, you know,
that the government was wrong in being there that
they would say and do things which we didn't
condone. And when that happened, we'd ask them for
the good of everybody to tone it down. And only on a
few occasions did they not tone it down. By the time
you joined, say in 71, Nixon had already
implemented his Vietnamization. And that in
itself tended to withdraw a lot from the anti-war
movement. affect your cause at all? Well, in our
perspective, it did not tend to draw a lot to take
away from the anti-war movement, the volatilism
or the emotionalism, because we didn't believe
that it was actually occurring. We just believed
the same thing we believed when we started, that
once our troops withdrew, the country was going to
go North Vietnamese. that for whatever reasons
the South Vietnamese who identified with us were
not going to prevent that from happening. They had
us there for a number of years. We never figured out
how to do it. We knew that the country was going to
fall. We thought it was silly to say that
Vietnamization is occurring, that the
Vietnamese are taking over the war. They weren't
taking over the war. All they were doing is the
Americans were being withdrawn, and they weren't
taking over the war. They never did. They lost
conclusively in a very short period of time, And I
don't think anyone, it just seems so impossible
that anyone seriously thought that they were
going to be able to defend the country. the Arvin
invasion of Laos would testify to that fact since
they ended up pulling out on March 25th. Was there
any response to that from your vets against the
war? I mean, two days later, there was about 50,000
people nationwide that were protesting of some
sort. Anything up here happen in Minnesota after
that in particular? You know, our response was
we'd get up in the morning and have coffee and read
the Wall Street Journal or pick out the headlines
and listen to the radio, find out what had occurred
when something had happened. We'd go about and
we'd try and contact and set up more speaking
engagements and that kind of thing. Maybe hold a
press conference up here in the Twin Cities
involving some of the other local people. And we
became more involved with Citizens for Peace and
some of the other peace organizations. And we
began to coordinate the veterans with the
non-veteran peace organizations. I don't
specifically recall that we did anything else at
that time. Okay, because some groups, they tend
to, as incidents like that happen with this, start
with the invasion of Cambodia, and then now here
we've got Laos, and then some of the Christmas
bombings you see reciprocal or parallel anti-war
demonstrations going on. That's why I was asking
that. So by... February, January 31st through
February 2nd of 72, you had the Winter Soldier
Hearings in Detroit. Did the Minnesota charter or
chapter play any part in that or any thoughts on
that? Well, we helped coordinate setting them up
and lended our support to the national
organization and thought it was an awfully good
idea because One of the major issues in this area at
that time, as it was in the Detroit and across the
nation, was that there had been a number of
atrocities committed by American troops. And the
government was attempting to deny that and say
that wasn't the case. These atrocities were
committed for a number of reasons. The pressure
that was put on the troops in an area, the faulty
military strategy. where Americans were
continually sniped down and harassed and
eventually reacted less than competently. Well,
overall, that seemed to not have much effect,
though. And maybe that's what precipitated the
March on Washington and the April
demonstrations. And preceding that
demonstration, the Vets Against the War had a
week-long rally. And that was typified by John
Kerry's speech in Congress and then ended with the
throwing the medals back over to the Capitol. The
Winter Soldier hearings in Detroit probably had a
net detrimental effect to the anti-war movement
because we ended up with people. Here's the first
time that a group of vets gets together and says,
yes, I saw, witnessed, and was part of atrocities.
and broke down were very emotional and graphic in
describing what units, during what time span,
exactly what they did. They had long hair. They
weren't the PR people. They looked like they were
emotional basket cases in a number of cases. So
here you have the first people that say Americans
are committing atrocities. They're basically
saying we committed them. They're saying we ought
to get out of the war. And they have a disheveled
appearance. So people seem to identify and say,
well, those crazies did crazy things when they
were in NAMM, and now they're part of Vietnam
Veterans Against the War. That must be a crazies
organization. I think it really hurt us. Then we
rebound to John Kerry, who was by far and away our
most effective spokesman.
That was the high point of our organization after
his congressional testimony. Now, did you have
any meetings with John Kerry? Shortly after that,
in November of that year, we held a national
conference of Vietnam veterans against the war,
state coordinators and regional coordinators,
and the National Steering Committee. We got
together in Kansas City, and that was the second
time that I met John Kerry personally. He'd
attended a rally that we had held at Mankato with a
number of potential presidential candidates and
local state political figures. And he and I
attended the Kansas convention. And we were by
far, in my opinion, we were the only two who were not
wacko radical at that point. In fact, Minnesota,
our region, we ended up withdrawing from the
national VVAW movement because they were at a
place we couldn't identify. One of the proposals
was that we make tape-recorded conversations and
say, you know, hello, I'm, you know, former
Sergeant so-and-so from such-and-such a unit.
You know, you Americans in Vietnam, you know,
we're not winning the war. There's no sense that
you lose your life. Why don't you do whatever you
can to cause disruption in the military, and
potentially you'll get home earlier. One of the
suggestions was that a number of people do that,
and we pass these tapes out to GIs. And in my
consideration, that would have been a treasonous
act, and I thought it was just a lot of baloney. And
at that point, people were talking about all kinds
of bourgeoisie and all the radical political
terms and were extremely emotional, but not very
logical and rational. And they'd given up the idea
of conducting, press with the people. They
weren't going to logically get through to new
people so that new people who hadn't really
thought about this would start to influence their
congressmen. So the democratic process would
come into play. So Kerry was against that kind of
talk also? Yeah. He and I were the only two
coordinators that I recall at this meeting who
were. And you ended up withdrawing then? We ended
up withdrawing because, yeah, we were... Our
group, I and another fellow from Minnesota, we
were kind of shunned because we weren't radical
enough for him. What happened with Kerry then?
Shortly, there was a movement afoot at that time to
diminish his role in VVAW because other people had
banded together and either wanted the personal
limelight or didn't think that his political
position was radical enough. And his prominence
and his role disappeared at that point. Also
during those April demonstrations, do you think
the thousand or so vets that threw back their
medals, was that a radical act? What do you think
about that? No, I don't. I think that was a more
widespread, more patriotic act. They threw back
the medals because they didn't believe that the
war was being conducted in a proper way or should
have existed. And the larger number of them tended
to support the more grass-root feeling among the
vets. Well, it seemed then, after that week, that
compared to the Winter Soldier hearings, that
this had some positive effect. After all, it
climaxed with 500,000 people marching in
Washington. That must have been a good feeling. It
was. It was. And in my mind, there's no doubt but
that Vietnam Veterans Against the War mobilized
and made more people aware of the follies of
Vietnam than any other movement. And it probably
had a greater political impact than any other
organization during that 10-year time span.
You mentioned the more radical aspects. With the
continuing presence of US troops in Nam, actions
got more radical. For example, you have 1,500
students storming the ROTC building in Michigan,
and such similar actions overall. Did you have
growing radicalism, say, here in the U of M? Or how
do you guys deal with that? I mean, for instance,
just to... December 26 and 30, you've got the
bombing, intensive bombing of North Vietnam, and
the Vietnam vets against the war. Some seize
national monuments to make a quick protest, lock
themselves up in Betsy Ross's house, or locking,
staying inside the Statue of Liberty and
unfolding a US flag upside down. Did you all do
anything? like that? We didn't do anything like
that. We tried to increase our getting more press,
putting articles in the paper, attending more
meetings, holding more meetings. We tried to
continue in a more rational way. We really, the
Midwestern liberalism, believing in the
democratic process, we thought our whole
strategy from day one was to inform more people of
our perspective, talk to them, give them a chance
to think about this, and eventually they'd
influence a political process. We really didn't
go in for anything quite that sudden and radical
because we thought that in this area it would only
have a deleterious effect. How about in the
Republican convention in Miami in 72, you've got
the three Vietnam vets against the war who managed
to shout down and interrupt Nixon's speech before
they were dragged off. Is that one of these radical
gestures that you wouldn't have supported? I
wouldn't have supported that. I would have, you
know, if they wanted to interrupt him to make a
point because they were not being presented a
forum, that's fine. But, you know, they thought it
was necessary that they be dragged off. We always
tried to facilitate, you know, anyone and
everyone's point of view, and we just didn't agree
with some, and we would, you know, try to
rationally discuss those.